---
layout: post
title: "Running a Successful Working Group"
date: 2013-11-06 15:24
author: Henric Trotzig
categories:
  - Agile
---
Giving structure to an agile engineering team is hard. You want people to work
on the things that they are most interested in without losing focus on the main
goal of building a great product. No matter how you split your organization
into teams, you will miss covering certain areas of interest. This is where
working groups can come into play.

<!-- more -->

We are a diverse group of people at [Causes](https://www.causes.com). People
with different backgrounds, knowledge and interests make up the engineering
team. Even though product teams collaborate on a daily basis, we’ve noticed
that members with shared interests wanted to get together in a slightly more
formal way than over a cup of imported, light roast, deliciously smooth
pour-over coffee ([@dgouldin](https://twitter.com/dgouldin) can tell you more
about that...).  This is where working groups come into play.

Running a working group is a great way to gather people with shared interests
and allow people to strengthen skills within a certain area.  Our working
groups are made up of individuals with a self-identified interest that they
share with others. We currently run four working groups that cover Front-end
Technologies, System Architecture, Testing, and Security. Anyone is welcome to
join the groups, even people outside the engineering team.

## Goals

We believe the main goal of a working group is to come up with practices and
tools that the rest of the organization can benefit from. In our company, we
often talk about _force multipliers_. By influencing others, you multiply your
force. A good working group is a force multiplier. This is what we think is
part of that mission:

### Export knowledge to the rest of the team

Members of the working group should strive to have a shared understanding about
what to use, when to use it, and how to use it. At
[Causes](https://www.causes.com), this knowledge spreads throughout the
organization through tech talks, code inspections, blog posts, emails, pair
programming, and other means of collaboration.

### Resolve controversial decisions

Let’s face it — building a product inevitably includes having to make
decisions. These decisions can often be controversial. A working group can help
you resolve the tension by structuring the decisions that need to be made.

### Identify areas for future research and experimentation

A working group is a great place for discussing how different practices,
processes and framework/tools could be used to solve problems. We always
produce action items at our meeting, and these often aim at investigating some
area and coming up with a concrete plan to be shared at the next meeting.

## Getting the most out of a working group

Even though groups are self-organized and voluntary, we have found that some
structure is important to be successful.

### Meet regularly

We meet every other week for 30-60 minutes. This should be enough for most
working groups, but situations may arise that call for more attention, and a
tighter meeting schedule.

### Stick to an agenda

Preferably, circulate a meeting agenda ahead of time so that people can prepare
for the meeting. If you find yourself without having a meeting agenda (we all
know this can happen...), spend the first few minutes of the meeting
collaboratively creating one.

### Keep track of action items

The first item on the agenda should be following up on action items from the
previous meeting. During the meeting, take notes on all the action items that
are decided. Follow up by publishing the meeting notes in written form. This
can be an email, a document, a wiki article or any other searchable form of
documentation.

### Use a mailing list

This is great for circulating meeting notes and action items from the meeting.
And it’s ideal for discussions that may arise in between meetings. We use
Google Groups to create and manage our lists.

When expertise is spread out across a product-oriented team, you want the
subject experts to get together and make decisions. These subject experts can
then take the decisions out to their respective teams to share the knowledge.
Working groups help enable this and are a valuable practice for any
organization that needs to share knowledge that cross-cuts the formal team
structure.
